[Docs] Document multi-select for Graph and AgGrid (#1698)
mckinsey/vizro: vizro-core/docs/pages/user-guides/graph-table-actions.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! example "Cross-filter over 2 dimensions - from a graph" 
```

A cross-filter is when the user clicks on one _source_ graph or table to filter one or more _target_ components. In Vizro, a cross-filter operates through an intermediate [filter](filters.md). To configure a cross-filter:

> 1. Create a filter that targets the [graphs](graph.md), [tables](table.md) or [figures](figure.md) you would like to filter (both multi- and single-option are allowed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a filter that targets the [graphs](graph.md), [tables](table.md) or [figures](figure.md) you would like to filter.
```

### Cross-filter from table

> The trigger for a cross-filter from an [AG Grid](table.md#ag-grid) is clicking on a row or a cell in the table. The `value` argument of the [`set_control` action][vizro.actions.set_control] tells the action what to send to the `control`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trigger for a cross-filter from an [AG Grid](table.md#ag-grid) is clicking on a row, selecting a row's checkbox or clicking a cell in the table. The `value` argument of the [`set_control` action][vizro.actions.set_control] tells the action what to send to the `control`:
```

> - `"cell"`, `"column"`, `"row"` use the clicked cell’s value, column id, or row id respectively. The row id is AG Grid's `rowId`, which defaults to the row's index unless you configure `getRowId` in `dashGridOptions`.

Reviewer: I would break this into three bullets where with one sentence is described what's `cell` what's `column` similarly like how `row` is described

### Cross-filter from table

The trigger for a cross-filter from an [AG Grid](table.md#ag-grid) is clicking on a row, selecting a row's checkbox or clicking a cell in the table. The `value` argument of the [`set_control` action][vizro.actions.set_control] tells the action what to send to the `control`:

- `"cell"` uses the clicked cell’s value.
- `"column"` uses the clicked cell’s column id, which corresponds to the DataFrame column name.
- `"row"` uses the clicked cell’s row id. The row id is AG Grid's `rowId`, which defaults to the row's index unless you configure `getRowId` in `dashGridOptions`.
- Any other string is treated as a **column name** and values are taken from **selected rows**.

> !!! example "Cross-filter from table to graph"

Reviewer: The title of the example below (that shows how cell's value can be propagated) is:
`"Cross-filter from table to graph - propagating cell value"`.

Let's adjust the title of this example too, so it explains that selected row's values under column name sex are used to filter graph. Ideally, in a few words 😄.

        ![](../../assets/user_guides/graph_table_actions/cross_filter_from_table.gif)

> In the example above, when you click on a row in the table, the graph is cross-filtered to show data only for one sex. The column of the clicked cell does not matter: the value is always taken from the `sex` column of the clicked row.

Reviewer: Rephrase so it's obvious that multiple rows can be selected.

    The mechanism for triggering the filter when its value is set by `va.set_control` is an [implicit actions chain](../tutorials/custom-actions-tutorial.md#implicit-actions-chain).

> When all rows are deselected, the control is reset to its original value. This effectively clears any cross-filter or cross-parameter that was applied. You can also reset all controls on a page by clicking the ["Reset controls" button](controls.md#reset-controls).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When all rows are deselected, the control resets to its original value. This effectively clears any cross-filter or cross-parameter that was applied. You can also reset all controls on a page by clicking the ["Reset controls" button](controls.md#reset-controls).
```

> You can set `set_control.value` argument to `value="cell"` and in this case, the value of the clicked cell will be propagated to the `control`. Multi-select is not possible for this option.

Reviewer: multi-select behaviour is described just below the example so let's remove this sentence here.
```suggestion
You can set `set_control.value` argument to `value="cell"` and in this case, the value of the clicked cell will be propagated to the `control`.
```

> You can set `set_control.value` argument to `value="cell"` and in this case, the value of the clicked cell will be propagated to the `control`. Multi-select is not possible for this option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you set the `set_control.value` argument to `value="cell"`, the value of the clicked cell propagates to the `control`. Multi-select is not possible for this option.
```

        # See yaml_version example
        pages:
          - components:
              - actions:
                  - control: sex_filter
                    type: set_control
                    value: cell
                figure:
                  _target_: dash_ag_grid
                  data_frame: tips
                title: Click on a row to use that row's sex to filter graph
                type: ag_grid
              - figure:
                  _target_: histogram
                  data_frame: tips
                  x: tip
                id: tips_graph
                type: graph
            controls:
              - column: sex
                id: sex_filter
                targets:
                  - tips_graph
                type: filter
            title: Cross-filter from table to graph
        ```

    === "Result"

        ![](../../assets/user_guides/graph_table_actions/cross_filter_from_table_2.gif)

!!! tip

    **Multi-select** depends on how you set `value` in `set_control`:

    - If `value` is a **column name** (values are taken from **selected rows**), **multi-row selection** is turned on by default, including checkboxes.

>     - If `value` is **`"cell"`**, **`"column"`**, or **`"row"`** (values come from the **clicked cell**), **multi-select is not available** as interaction is driven by cell clicks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If `value` is **`"cell"`**, **`"column"`**, or **`"row"`**, **multi-select is not available** as interaction is driven by single cell clicks.
```

    You can still customize selection with `dashGridOptions` on `dash_ag_grid(...)`, for example `figure=dash_ag_grid(..., dashGridOptions={"rowSelection": {"mode": "singleRow"}})` when you use a column name and want only one row selected. The Dash AG Grid offers many [options to configure row selection](https://dash.plotly.com/dash-ag-grid/single-row-selection). These can be [passed directly](table.md#basic-usage) into `dash_ag_grid` as keyword arguments or set for multiple tables by creating a [custom table function](custom-tables.md).

>     When multi-row selection is enabled, click checkboxes to select or deselect a row. Alternatively, `set_control` is also triggered by pressing ++space++ while focused on a row.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When multi-row (or single-row) selection is enabled, click checkboxes or click any cell to select or deselect its row. Alternatively, `set_control` is also triggered by pressing ++space++ while focused on a row.
```

>     Ranges of rows can be selected by holding down ++shift++ while clicking on rows. This behavior also applies when checkbox selection is disabled, and in group selection. See the [Dash AG Grid multi-row selection documentation](https://dash.plotly.com/dash-ag-grid/multi-row-selection#selecting-multiple-rows-without-the-ctrl-key) for more examples.

Reviewer: Let's describe how ++command++ click can be used to select or deselect multiple rows one by one.

>     If you use multi-row selection but your filter or parameter uses a single-value selector (for example `vm.RadioItemas()`), the control only updates when exactly one row is selected. Selecting two or more rows leaves the control unchanged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you use multi-row selection but your filter or parameter uses a single-value selector (for example `vm.RadioItems()`), the control only updates when exactly one row is selected. Selecting two or more rows leaves the control unchanged.
```

### Cross-filter from graph

> The trigger for a cross-filter from a [graph](graph.md) is clicking on data in the graph. A single click sends one value to the control. You can also use **box select** or **lasso select** to select multiple data points at once; see [Cross-filter from graph with selection](#cross-filter-from-graph-with-selection) for details and examples.

Reviewer: Consider adding how ++command++ click also enables multi point selection from Graph

    The mechanism for triggering the filter when its value is set by `va.set_control` is an [implicit actions chain](../tutorials/custom-actions-tutorial.md#implicit-actions-chain).

When all rows are deselected, the control resets to its original value. This effectively clears any cross-filter or cross-parameter that was applied. You can also reset all controls on a page by clicking the ["Reset controls" button](controls.md#reset-controls).

If you set the `set_control.value` argument to `value="cell"`, the value of the clicked cell propagates to the `control`.

!!! example "Cross-filter from table to graph - propagating cell value"

    === "app.py"

        ```{.python pycafe-link hl_lines="15"}
        import vizro.actions as va
        import vizro.models as vm
        import vizro.plotly.express as px
        from vizro import Vizro
        from vizro.tables import dash_ag_grid

        tips = px.data.tips()

        page = vm.Page(
            title="Cross-filter from table to graph",
            components=[
                vm.AgGrid(

>                     title=Click on a cell to use that cell's value to filter graph",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                    title="Click on a cell to use that cell's value to filter graph",
```

        # See yaml_version example
        pages:
          - components:
              - actions:
                  - control: sex_filter
                    type: set_control
                    value: cell
                figure:
                  _target_: dash_ag_grid
                  data_frame: tips
                title: Click on a row to use that row's value to filter graph
                type: ag_grid
              - figure:
                  _target_: histogram
                  data_frame: tips
                  x: tip
                id: tips_graph
                type: graph
            controls:
              - column: sex
                id: sex_filter
                targets:
                  - tips_graph
                type: filter
            title: Cross-filter from table to graph
        ```

    === "Result"

        ![](../../assets/user_guides/graph_table_actions/cross_filter_from_table_2.gif)

!!! tip

    **Multi-select** depends on how you set `value` in `set_control`:

    - If `value` is a **column name** (values are taken from **selected rows**), **multi-row selection** is turned on by default, including checkboxes.

>     - If `value` is **`"cell"`**, **`"column"`**, or **`"row"`**, **multi-select is not available** as interaction is driven by single cell clicks.

Reviewer: Let's move this part above the "tip".

    When multi-row (or single-row) selection is enabled, click checkboxes or click any cell to select or deselect its row. Alternatively, `set_control` is also triggered by pressing ++space++ while focused on a row.

    Ranges of rows can be selected by holding down ++shift++ while clicking on rows. This behavior also applies when checkbox selection is disabled, and in group selection. Ranges of rows can be selected by holding down ++shift++ while clicking on rows.

    Use ++cmd++ click (or ++ctrl++ click on Windows/Linux) to select or deselect individual rows one by one. This behavior also applies when checkbox selection is disabled, and in group selection. See the [Dash AG Grid multi-row selection documentation](https://dash.plotly.com/dash-ag-grid/multi-row-selection#selecting-multiple-rows-without-the-ctrl-key) for more examples.

    If you use multi-row selection but your filter or parameter uses a single-value selector (for example `vm.RadioItems()`), the control only updates when exactly one row is selected. Selecting two or more rows leaves the control unchanged.

### Cross-filter from graph

> The trigger for a cross-filter from a [graph](graph.md) is clicking on data in the graph. A single click sends one value to the control. You can also use box/lasso select, or ++cmd++ (++ctrl++ on Windows/Linux) + click to select multiple data points at once; see [Cross-filter from graph with selection](#cross-filter-from-graph-with-selection) for details and examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trigger for a cross-filter from a [graph](graph.md) is clicking on data in the graph. A single click sends one value to the control. You can also use box/lasso select to select multiple data points at once, or ++shift++ + click to select or deselect individual points one by one (works only for subset of plotly charts); see [Cross-filter from graph with selection](#cross-filter-from-graph-with-selection) for details and examples.
```

After I wrote this suggestion I noticed that the sentence is too clunky. Maybe it would be better to explain shift+click in a separate sentence, or not explaining it at all as it's explained below in the `"Vizro automatically turns on click selection (clickmode is set to event+select)..."` part.

    In full, what happens is as follows:

    1. Clicking on the box (or using box/lasso select on multiple data points) triggers the `va.set_control` action. This uses the value of `y` (in other words, "Male" or "Female") to set the selector underlying `vm.Filter(id="sex_filter")`. When multiple points are selected, unique values across all points are sent.
    1. The change in value of `vm.Filter(id="sex_filter")` triggers the filter to be re-applied on its `targets=["tips_table"]` so that a filtered table is shown.

    The mechanism for triggering the filter when its value is set by `va.set_control` is an [implicit actions chain](../tutorials/custom-actions-tutorial.md#implicit-actions-chain).

### Cross-filter from graph - multi-select

> 

Reviewer: Add a sentence here how clickmode="event+select" is included by default for the most plotly charts and it means that when graph's point is selected that this point will be highlighted. This also enables selecting multiple points by holding shift and clicking. Also, enables unselecting the last selected point. (something like this 😄)

In addition to clicking on a single data point, graphs also support **box select** and **lasso select** to select multiple data points at once. When multiple points are selected, the unique values across all selected points are sent to the control.

> Vizro automatically enables this when a graph has `actions` defined: the graph's `clickmode` is set to `"event+select"` and the box/lasso selection tools are kept in the graph's modebar. When a graph has no `actions`, these selection tools are removed from the modebar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vizro automatically turns on click selection (`clickmode` is set to `"event+select"`) and keeps the box and lasso tools in the graph's modebar when a graph has `actions`.
```

        # See yaml_version example
        pages:
          - components:
              - actions:
                  - control: day_filter
                    type: set_control
                    value: day
                figure:
                  _target_: scatter
                  color: day
                  custom_data: day
                  data_frame: tips
                  x: total_bill
                  y: tip
                title: Use box or lasso select to filter by day
                type: graph
              - figure:
                  _target_: bar
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                id: total_tips
                title: Total tips by day
                type: graph
            controls:
              - column: day
                id: day_filter
                targets:
                  - total_tips
                type: filter
            title: Cross-filter from graph with selection
        ```

    === "Result"

        ![](../../assets/user_guides/graph_table_actions/cross_filter_from_graph_3.gif)

> When you use box select or lasso select to select multiple points in the scatter plot, the bar chart is cross-filtered to show data for all the selected days. If only one point is clicked, the filter is set to that single value. If you deselect all points (for example by clicking on an empty area of the plot), the control resets to its original value and the filter is cleared.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When select multiple points in the scatter plot, the bar chart is cross-filtered to show data for all the selected days. If only one point is clicked, the filter is set to that single value. If you deselect all points the control resets to its original value. You can unselect all points by double clicking on an empty area of the plot or by clicking on the last single selected point
```

??? details "Behind the scenes mechanism"

    In full, what happens is as follows:

>     1. A clientside callback combines the graph's `clickData` and `selectedData` into a single trigger. If box or lasso selection is used, the trigger contains all selected points; otherwise it contains the single clicked point.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    1. A client-side callback combines the graph's `clickData` and `selectedData` into a single trigger. If box or lasso selection is used, the trigger contains all selected points; otherwise it contains the single clicked point.
```

    In full, what happens is as follows:

    1. Clicking on the box (or using box/lasso select on multiple data points) triggers the `va.set_control` action. This uses the value of `y` (in other words, "Male" or "Female") to set the selector underlying `vm.Filter(id="sex_filter")`. When multiple points are selected, unique values across all points are sent.
    1. The change in value of `vm.Filter(id="sex_filter")` triggers the filter to be re-applied on its `targets=["tips_table"]` so that a filtered table is shown.

    The mechanism for triggering the filter when its value is set by `va.set_control` is an [implicit actions chain](../tutorials/custom-actions-tutorial.md#implicit-actions-chain).

### Cross-filter from graph - multi-select

In addition to clicking on a single data point, graphs also support **box select** and **lasso select** to select multiple data points at once. When multiple points are selected, the unique values across all selected points are sent to the control.

> Vizro automatically turns on click selection (`clickmode` is set to `"event+select"`) and keeps the box and lasso tools in the graph's modebar when a graph has `actions`. This means that when a graph's point is clicked, it is highlighted. It also enables selecting multiple points by holding ++shift++ and clicking, and unselecting a point by clicking on it again.

Reviewer: Let's just emphasize that highlight and selectings/deselecting point by point doesn't work for all type of plotly charts.

```suggestion
Vizro automatically turns on click selection (`clickmode` is set to `"event+select"`) and keeps the box and lasso tools in the graph's modebar when a graph has `actions`. This means that when a graph's point is clicked, it is highlighted. Also, holding ++shift++ while clicking lets you select or deselect individual points on the graph.
```

        # See yaml_version example
        pages:
          - components:
              - actions:
                  - control: day_filter
                    type: set_control
                    value: day
                figure:
                  _target_: scatter
                  color: day
                  custom_data: day
                  data_frame: tips
                  x: total_bill
                  y: tip
                title: Use box or lasso select to filter by day
                type: graph
              - figure:
                  _target_: bar
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                id: total_tips
                title: Total tips by day
                type: graph
            controls:
              - column: day
                id: day_filter
                targets:
                  - total_tips
                type: filter
            title: Cross-filter from graph with selection
        ```

    === "Result"

        ![](../../assets/user_guides/graph_table_actions/cross_filter_from_graph_3.gif)

> When select multiple points in the scatter plot, the bar chart is cross-filtered to show data for all the selected days. If only one point is clicked, the filter is set to that single value. If you deselect all points the control resets to its original value. You can unselect all points by double clicking on an empty area of the plot or by clicking on the last single selected point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When select multiple points in the scatter plot, the bar chart is cross-filtered to show data for all the selected days. If only one point is clicked, the filter is set to that single value. If you deselect all points the control resets to its original value. You can deselect all points by double clicking on an empty area of the plot or by clicking on the last single selected point.
```

    1. `Graph._get_value_from_trigger` iterates over all points in the trigger, extracts the unique values for the specified `value`, and returns a sorted list.
    1. The `set_control` action receives this list and sets the control accordingly: for a multi-value selector the full list is used, for a range selector the min and max are used, and for a single-value selector the control only updates when exactly one value is present.
    1. If no points are selected (deselection), `None` is returned, which resets the control to its original value.

    The mechanism for triggering the filter when its value is set by `va.set_control` is an [implicit actions chain](../tutorials/custom-actions-tutorial.md#implicit-actions-chain).

!!! tip

    If you use box/lasso selection but your filter or parameter uses a single-value selector (for example `vm.Dropdown(multi=False)`), the control only updates when exactly one point is selected. Selecting two or more points with different values leaves the control unchanged.

>     You can override the automatic `clickmode` by setting it explicitly in your figure function, for example `fig.update_layout(clickmode="event")` to disable multi-point selection while keeping click actions enabled.

Reviewer: Something like this 😄 
```suggestion
    You can override the automatic `clickmode` by setting it explicitly in your figure function, for example `fig.update_layout(clickmode="event")` to disable highlighting points when clicked and ++shift++ + click possibility.
```

    In full, what happens is as follows:

>     1. Clicking on a cell (or using box/lasso select on multiple cells) triggers the first `va.set_control` action. This uses the value of `day` (in other words, "Thur", "Fri", "Sat" or "Sun") to set the selector underlying `vm.Filter(id="day_filter")`. When multiple points are selected, unique values across all points are sent.

Reviewer: Let's double check that box/lasso work for this type of chart. If not, just revert this changes

)
```

> However, it is not yet possible to automatically extract both the row header and column header from a pivoted AG Grid as a pair of filter values. You can still use `value="cell"`, `value="column"`, or `value="row"` to get individual properties of the clicked cell.

Reviewer: This is exactly what's enabled, so let's replace this section with a full example from my `cellClicked` PR. You can use the example from the [scratch_dev file](https://github.com/mckinsey/vizro/blob/c61414a68e9872cb31e98382f9a330b09ac89590/vizro-core/examples/scratch_dev/app.py). The most suitable case to show would be [this AgGrid](https://github.com/mckinsey/vizro/blob/c61414a68e9872cb31e98382f9a330b09ac89590/vizro-core/examples/scratch_dev/app.py#L109-L116) as a set_control's source.

)
```

> !!! example "Cross-filter over 2 dimensions - table"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! example "Cross-filter over 2 dimensions - from a table"
```

    === "app.py"

        ```{.python pycafe-link hl_lines="22-25"}
        import vizro.actions as va
        import vizro.models as vm
        import vizro.plotly.express as px
        from vizro import Vizro
        from vizro.tables import dash_ag_grid

        tips = px.data.tips()
        pivot_tips = (
            tips.pivot_table(index="sex", columns="day", aggfunc="size", fill_value=0)
            .reindex(columns=["Thur", "Fri", "Sat", "Sun"])
            .reset_index()
        )

        page = vm.Page(
            title="dash_ag_grid using cellClicked",
            components=[
                vm.AgGrid(
                    title="set_control.value=column",
                    figure=dash_ag_grid(pivot_tips),
                    actions=[
                        va.set_control(control="day_filter", value="column"),

>                         va.set_control(control="sex_filter", value="sex"),

Reviewer: Add annotations and highlight these two rows
